Wave Optics

Interference: Principle of superposition –Interference of light – Interference in thin films (Reflection Geometry) & applications -Colors in thin films- Newton’s Rings- Determination of wavelength and refractive index.

Diffraction: Introduction – Fresnel and Fraunhofer diffraction – Fraunhofer diffraction due to single slit, double slit – N-slits(Qualitative) – Grating – Dispersive power and resolving power of Grating(Qualitative).

Polarization: Introduction-Types of polarization – Polarization by reflection, refraction and Double refraction – Nicol’s Prism -Half wave and Quarter wave plates

Lasers and Fiber optics

Lasers: Introduction – Characteristics of laser – Spontaneous and Stimulated emissions of radiation – Einstein’s coefficients – Population inversion –Lasing action- Pumping mechanisms – Ruby laser – He-Ne laser – Applications of lasers.

Fiber optics: Introduction –Principle of optical fiber- Acceptance Angle-Numerical ApertureClassification of optical fibers based on refractive index profile and modes –Propagation of electromagnetic wave through optical fibers – Applications.

Quantum Mechanics, Free Electron Theory and Band theory

Quantum Mechanics: Dual nature of matter – Heisenberg’s Uncertainty Principle – Significance and properties of wave function – Schrodinger’s time independent and dependent wave equations– Particle in a one-dimensional infinite potential well.

Free Electron Theory: Classical free electron theory (Qualitative with discussion of merits and demerits) – Quantum free electron theory– Equation for electrical conductivity based on quantum free electron theory- Fermi-Dirac distribution- Density of states (3D) – Fermi energy.

Band theory of Solids: Bloch’s Theorem (Qualitative) – Kronig – Penney model (Qualitative)- E vs K diagram – v vs K diagram – effective mass of electron – Classification of crystalline solids–concept of hole.

Dielectric and Magnetic Materials

Dielectric Materials: Introduction – Dielectric polarization – Dielectric polarizability, Susceptibility and Dielectric constant – Types of polarizations- Electronic (Quantitative), Ionic (Quantitative) and Orientation polarizations (Qualitative) – Lorentz internal fieldClausius- Mossotti equation- Piezoelectricity.

Magnetic Materials: Introduction – Magnetic dipole moment -MagnetizationMagnetic susceptibility and permeability – Origin of permanent magnetic moment – Classification of magnetic materials: Dia, para, Ferro, antiferro & Ferri magnetic materials – Domain concept for Ferromagnetism & Domain walls (Qualitative) – Hysteresis – soft and hard magnetic materials- Eddy currents- Engineering applications.

Semiconductors and Superconductors

Semiconductors: Introduction- Intrinsic semiconductors – Density of charge carriers – Electrical conductivity – Fermi level – extrinsic semiconductors – density of charge carriers – dependence of Fermi energy on carrier concentration and temperature – Drift and diffusion currents – Einstein’s equation- Hall effect – Hall coefficient –Applications of Hall effect.

Superconductors: Introduction – Properties of superconductors – Meissner effect – Type I and Type II superconductors – BCS theory (Qualitative) – Josephson effects (AC and DC) – SQUIDs – High Tc superconductors – Applications of superconductors.
